Maira is one of the best studied stars
in the sky yet it's kept a stunning
secret but scientists have only just
discovered in the glow of ultraviolet
light
the hidden universe showcase explores
exciting new results in astronomy with
your host dr. Robert hurt
today the hidden universe is taking a
break from our usual spitzer space
telescope discoveries in the infrared
part of the spectrum instead we're
moving to the other side of visible
light
NASA's Galaxy Evolution Explorer is an
Earth orbiting telescope with an
ultraviolet eye to the universe the
ozone layer in our atmosphere screens
out most of the incoming ultraviolet
light that's great for cutting down on
sunburns
but it means astronomers need
space-based telescopes like Alex if they
want to see what's going on out there
and what's going on turned out to be
quite a surprise when a team led by dr.
Chris Martin of Caltech stumbled across
this ultraviolet Marvel do you think
it's a comet at first glance so do a lot
of astronomers but it's nothing so
ordinary comets which travel within our
solar system are saw them longer than
the distance between the Earth and Sun
this spectacular discovery surrounds the
star Myra and spans 13 lightyears that's
three times further than from us to the
next star what's pretty cool about this
result is not only was it unexpected it
was kind of an accident dr. mark Seibert
part of the research team explains Galax
primary mission is is to map the entire
sky in the ultraviolet when this
discovery for Myra was made we weren't
specifically targeting my ride it just
happened to be one of our fields of view
so when the images came down and we just
happened to be going through them we
noticed this very bizarre nebulosity
around it it was quite a surprise
because nobody expected to see anything
in the ultraviolet around Myra and
nobody expected to see and tremendously
long 13 light year tail behind my eyes
so what do we know about Myra and why
would it have such a unique tale
it's a well known variable star which
appears red to the naked eye when it's
bright enough to see even though it's
only twenty percent more massive than
the Sun Myra is so large that it would
swallow even the orbit of Mars because
of their size red giants lose their
gravitational grip on their outer layers
glowing material away in a kind of
stellar wind over the course of tens of
thousands of years this material forms a
trailing tail we see this tail because
Myra is moving unusually fast relative
to its neighboring stars where its wind
slams into the local interstellar medium
a leading shock wave or bow shock forms
the researchers theorized that hot
electrons from the shock mix with the
wind and stream around and behind
forming the tail excited hydrogen
molecules begin to glow hydrogen
naturally emits in the ultraviolet I'm
so was just waiting to be discovered by
Galax in fact I'd like to think of my
row as a true shooting star most people
when you say shooting star think of
meteoroids burning up through the
atmosphere with a very brief flash of
light but this is a true shooting star a
star traveling supersonically creating a
bowel shock and leaving a luminous tail
behind it also a turbulent way since our
own Sun will become a red giant in
several billion years myra gives us a
chance to look into our own system's
future by looking back along Mira's tale
we see progressively older material
tracing its outflow history back as much
as thirty thousand years it's a kind of
fossil record of the final breaths from
a dying star so what we see with Myra is
a dramatic example of the recycling of
stellar materials the tail is leaving
the seeds for new planets and new stars
the elements of carbon oxygen nitrogen
hydrogen all laid out for us almost like
a ticker tape that we hope to be able to
study in a way that we've never really
been able to study this process before
it's remarkable that even after 400
years of scientific scrutiny
Myra still harbors astounding secrets
missions like the Galaxy Evolution
Explorer open our eyes to a whole new
way of seeing what's all around us and
sometimes let us catch a shooting star
for the Spitzer Science Center I'm dr.
Robert hurt reminding you there's a
hidden universe just waiting to be
discovered the hidden universe is
produced by the Spitzer Science Center
at the California Institute of
Technology in Pasadena this fits our
mission is managed by NASA's Jet
Propulsion Laboratory